a wise son heeds his father's
instruction but a scoffer
does not listen to rebuke a man shall
eat well by the fruit of his mouth but
the soul of the unfaithful feeds on
violence he who guards his mouth
preserves his life but he who opens wide
his lips shall have destruction the soul
of a lazy man desires and has nothing
but the soul of the diligent shall be
made rich a righteous man hates lying
but a wicked man is loathsome and comes
to shame righteousness God's him whose
way is blameless but wickedness
overthrows the sinner there is one who
makes himself rich yet has nothing and
one who makes himself poor it has great
riches the ransom of a man's life is his
riches but the poor does not hear rebuke
the light of the righteous rejoices but
the lamp of the wicked will be put out
by pride comes nothing but strife but
with the well-advised his wisdom wealth
gained by dishonesty will be diminished
but he who gathers by Labour will
increase Hope deferred makes the heart
sick but when the desire comes it is a
tree of life he who despises the word
will be destroyed but he who fears the
commandment will be rewarded the law of
the wise is a fountain of life to turn
one away from the snares of death good
understanding gains favor but the way of
the unfaithful is hard every prudent man
acts with knowledge but a fool lays open
his folly
a wicked messenger falls into trouble
but a faithful ambassador brings health
poverty and shame will come to him who
disdains correction that he who regards
a rebuke will be honored a desire
accomplished is sweet to the soul but it
is an abomination to fools to depart
from evil he who walks with wise men
will be wise but the companion of fools
will be destroyed evil pursues sinners
but to the righteous good shall be
repaid a good man leaves an inheritance
to his children's children but the
wealth of a sinner is stored up for the
righteous much food is in the fallow
ground of the poor and for lack of
justice there is waste
he who spares his rod hates his son but
he who loves him disciplines him
promptly
the righteous eats to the satisfying of
his soul but the stomach of the wicked
shall be in want